Hi, I'm vegan. If you're vegan, too, you may
have been asked questions such as, "How can
you be vegan when there are people starving
in Africa?" If you work in animal rights,
you may have been challenged with such things
as, "Why are you concerned about animal rights
when there's a civil war in Syria?" When there's
some humanitarian crisis or political crisis
ongoing, right now, in the world. And these
questions may be put to you in a kind of sneering,
insincere way, as a sort of veiled insult,
but they may also be asked quite sincerely.
I grew up at a time when the fear of the atom
bomb was very real, when there were all sorts
of issues that got marginalized (put to one
side) because people were more concerned with
high-temperature extinction events, such as
thermonuclear war, [the] balance of powers
between the United States and the Soviet Union
and so on. So those distractions can be overwhelming.
They can be very real. And if you know someone
who is personally, emotionally invested in
one of these disasters, whether it's Palestine
or Syria or Vietnam or Cambodia, whatever
the case may be, for them, subjectively, those
may be the real reasons why they're not vegan,
or why they're not concerned with (for example)
ecological problems, such as global warming,
pollution, toxicity, the ecological problems
that are linked to meat and dairy production,
animal agriculture, and so on. So, I think
it's the sort of question that you have to
answer sincerely, even if the people asking
it are not being sincere. Cory McCarthy, who
is a vegan here on Youtube, he addressed this
in terms of a certain logical fallacy, and
I'm making this video partly because I actually
address the issue in terms of a very different
logical fallacy. I feel that when people are
presenting this, they're trapped in thinking,
"If you can't do everything, why do anything?"
That's not the name of a formal, logical fallacy,
it is simply a way of thinking about things.
And, y'know, another example of this same
category of thought is when people say to
you, "Well, if some medication is not vegan
(some pills that you might have to take for
your health), if those contain animal products,
then what's the point of trying to be vegan?"
So, in other words, if you can't be 100% vegan,
why would you try to be 99% vegan? So, again,
the way of thinking there, which is (kind
of) a natural thing for human beings to do,
is to say, "Well, if, by definition, being
vegan is impossible, because (for example)
you sometimes have to get an injection, and
the medication that's being injected into
you is not entirely vegan…"(I remember that
one of the other examples was construction
materials: you know, some of the materials
in the walls of your house may not be vegan)
"…so, therefore, why bother at all?" Although
the people posing the question will probably
not use words quite as blunt as "Why bother
at all?" These are (sort of) two legs of the
same stool. Veganism can't solve all the world's
problems, and it doesn't claim to. Veganism
may not be able to resolve the Syrian Civil
War. So what? Quitting smoking is not going
to end the Syrian Civil War. If you're really
concerned about the Syrian Civil War, quit
smoking anyway. There's no overlap: one doesn't
preclude the other. You don't become less
able to make a positive difference in Syria
because you quit smoking. You want to help
refugees? Quit smoking. I'm not saying everyone
can, I'm not saying everyone will. Maybe there
are some wonderful examples of humanitarians
who are smoking cigarettes and eating meat
and helping refugees. They'd do a better job,
they would have more positive impacts (for
themselves, and for the world) if they could
quit smoking, and if they could quit eating
meat. Now, in one respect, yes, being vegan
is, in this way, comparable to quitting smoking.
That's why I use it: it's a sort of reduction
of a complex issue to a much simpler issue.
But there are other ways in which it is very
different. I myself have done a little bit
of humanitarian work --[and] I say that not
because it was "a little bit" of work, but
because I regard the N.G.O. I was working
for as being just-barely-humanitarian. We
were working in so-called "Food Security".
That's the polite, professional term for helping
people who would starve to death not starve.
Now, the other reality is, the people we're
talking about, if my agency wasn't handing
them sacks of rice, they would not have starved
to death, they would have migrated. They would
have gotten up and moved somewhere else, where
they could earn a living, work on a farm,
eat food. So, the food policy was linked to
government policy, agricultural policy, ultimately,
border-enforcement and migration policy. Um…
I could say a lot more on that subject. But
let me tell you, even with the sort of purest
form of intervention… so that aspect of
what we were doing, just directly handing
out sacks of rice [is] a very pure form of
charity, some of the other things my agency
was doing, [were] not so pure, [and] have
much more complicated consequences. If you
relocate 20 foreigners to a small village
full of "food insecure" people, full of people
who are potentially or actually starving,
full of people who are struggling to get enough
to eat. If those 20 foreigners are eating
beef and pork on a daily basis, it has an
impact on that community, and if your eyes
are open, you can see it. I remember I lived
in one village where the whole village killed
one pig every day. If you woke up at like
4:30 in the morning, impossibly early in the
morning, and went to the village market, there
would be just a couple of people who sold,
uh, local fruit there…you could get pineapple.
You could get rice. You could get just a few
things. I ate all the garlic in that town.
I remember, for several weeks I was able to
supplement my meager diet of white rice and
yellow lentils with garlic (that was imported
from China), and after a certain point in
time there was no more garlic, [in] the whole
town, [I] had eaten it all. But yeah, in that
town, the cows being raised for beef were
directly destroying the one river, the tiny
trickle of a river, that the children would
go to swim in, that women would go to wash
their laundry in, that people relied on for
their drinking water (people also relied on
that river for fish, they would try to kill
fish in it, [but there] weren't really any
fish in that river). The ecological impact,
the economic impact of that meat-agriculture,
and the blood and the sewage, all of the pollution,
and so on, is right there in your face. And
boy, I don't want to digress into it in this
video, I'll tell you something else, though,
the suffering of the animals was right there
in your face. I got to see in that village
something I'd read about, but never thought
I'd see myself: I got to see a calf (a baby
cow) mourning the death of its own mother.
Miserable, miserable spectacle. And the conditions
for the cows in this village were better than
on a factory farm: they were actually running
around in a grass field, and they had free
range throughout the whole village, the whole
town. They were right outside my window and
so on. But boy, the day they killed that calf's
mother, the calf was up all night, weeping
and crying out for its mother. And, I mean,
nobody was getting any sleep. People were
pretending to sleep, but this was so loud
and so mournful, this spectacle… I remember,
I wasn't getting any sleep anyway, so I got
up and walked around and I witnessed what
this calf was doing. And it was actually pushing
down fences and rooting through all kinds
of barriers, desperately looking for its mother,
anywhere. And among the other things that
made this so surreal, the human beings were
trying to ignore this, [although] the noise
this calf was making was so loud that really
it was impossible to ignore, but you could
see the reaction of the other cows, too. The
adult cattle, they'd been through this before.
Y'know, they knew the deal. And eventually,
after hours and hours of screaming and wailing,
I remember there were two adult cows (who
were not the cow's mother) that just sort
of said "Come here and join us in this shed",
and, y'know, the calf gave up. The calf had
searched the entire town, and realized it
wasn't going to find its mother anywhere.
Because its mother was nowhere. People who
grow up in the countryside are supposed to
be brutal and heartless about killing animals,
but, on the contrary, I saw tremendous cowardice,
tremendously evasive attitude to the reality
of the violence and the suffering and the
filth of it all. That even people who grew
up in those villages and had slit the animals'
throats a hundred times would be squeamish
about breaking a chicken's neck, and I saw
all of these animals being killed. And I saw
some more exotic animals [being killed, too],
a giant python, very memorably, and something
like a small mountain-lion, I don't know what
species it was, some Southeast Asian jungle-cat,
while the last of the jungle was being cut
down. So, look, even if you really were directly
doing humanitarian work, whether it's in Syria
or in Southeast Asia or anywhere else, yes,
it still makes an ethical difference, and
it may, in a sense, make more of an ethical
difference, because the impacts you're having
in eating meat are not somewhere far away
in a factory in a first-world country, they're
right there in the community you're supposedly
trying to help. And, on the other hand, as
with quitting smoking, which is more of a
morally-neutral example, there is simply no
substitution between these two things: if
you sincerely are concerned about the Syrian
Civil War, there's no sense in which there's
an obstruction or preclusion between that
and being vegan. I heard a Taiwanese professor
give a lecture on this, in which she said
that was the number one problem she ran into,
people saying to her, "How can you be concerned
about animal rights?" (And she wasn't just
concerned about veganism, she was concerned
about the treatment of stray dogs, and some
other things.) "How can you be concerned about
animal rights when we have all of these problems
with human rights?" And she said, "The reality
is there will always be problems with human
rights, so if you are saying that animal rights
are a lower priority than human rights, then
that means animal rights will never be addressed,
because there will never be a time when all
human rights problems will be resolved (and
you can then turn to your second priority
of animal rights)." It's an interesting way
to phrase it. But the other categorical difference
is that veganism is an attainable goal. It's
something you can do, now. You can accomplish
it today. You can sustain it for the rest
of your life. And you can have the satisfaction
of doing that. Right now, in the year 2015,
I don't know when the Syrian Civil War is
going to end. If I chose to devote the next
10 years of my life to trying to help people
in Syria, 10 years might not be enough. It
might not be resolved within my lifetime.
Civil wars can go on for a long time. Look
at Cambodia. At any stage… I won't digress
into it. That's not an easy call to make.
Also, political problems are complicated.
You think you're doing the right thing in
Syria, maybe you think you're supporting the
right side, and maybe later on you find out
[that] you were making things worse, not better.
Maybe the outcomes, even though you had good
intentions, turn out to be negative. Political
problems, human rights problems, are like
that. Even the humanitarian work I've just
mentioned: we think we're helping people by
handing out sacks of rice, are we really?
Doing the research on that, outcome analysis,
that's tricky. The other things we were doing
with that humanitarian agency, helping to
reform agriculture, to modernize agriculture
(again, supposedly to prevent starvation,
to improve food-security), [that's] morally
complicated. Complicated outcomes. Sometimes
you're trying to make people wealthier and
you end up making them poorer. Sometimes the
project fails, the outcomes weren't what you
think they were. And even when they do succeed…
I remember one of the villages I was in, I
was there with my boss, and he was just commenting
casually, there were two different ethnic
groups, two different tribal groups, living
right next to each-other, and he was just
commenting casually, "Oh, well, that other
tribal group, they're too poor and backwards
for us to work with them, so we work with
helping this tribal group, even though they're
wealthier, to [help them] get out of poverty,
because they're more organized and they can
take advantage of this type of humanitarian
assistance." And, y'know, he mentioned this
to me, some of these people were standing
around, they couldn't understand us speaking
in English, but the real, invidious, racial
hatred and jealousy between the two groups,
was obvious even while I was standing there.
I learned even more about it later, but the
fact that we as a charity were making this
[division] worse by helping one ethnic group,
and not helping the other ethnic group, that's
going to have consequences. And those consequences
will be complicated. Veganism is not like
that. Amazingly, like quitting smoking, there's
nothing bad about it, you don't lose anything.
Quitting smoking you don't help the tobacco
plants. Simply removing yourself from the
whole equation of animal agriculture is a
positive thing with positive outcomes, but
also with no unforeseen outcomes. If you've
been following the Arab Spring and the Syrian
Civil War, at several stages the United States
was tentatively trying to choose which side
they were going to support, which militias
were moderately pro-democracy, or represented
a less extreme form of Islam. And guess what?
Some of the guns that they put into the hands
of their so-called allies have ended up in
the hands of the Islamic State. Everybody
knows it. If you're old enough, you can remember
a time when the Taliban were an American client
army, when the United States supported the
Taliban. If you're old enough, you can remember
a time when the United States supported Pol
Pot and the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia. And I've
done the research: I can understand, and I
can even sympathize a little bit, with why
the United States made that decision. "Seemed
like a good idea at the time!" You look back
a few decades later and think, "Boy, the United
States has blood on its hands from supporting
the wrong side, and perpetuating a terrible
conflict, and so on and so forth." We use
this word "rights", and it makes things sound
simple. You're in a struggle for human rights,
you're in a struggle for democracy. Complicated.
Veganism is exponentially simpler than human
rights. It's exponentially simpler even than
animal rights. We can know the outcomes, we
can know we're doing something positive for
ourselves, [and] something positive for others.
And you can do that today. And even if you
can't do everything, you can do something.
You can do this. It's not in your power to
close down a slaughterhouse. It's not in your
power close down a laboratory that's torturing
monkeys to death just to try to invent a slightly
redder shade of lipstick. And it is definitely
not in your power to decide the outcome of
the Syrian Civil War. But it is in your power
to stop eating meat, to stop drinking milk,
to stop wearing leather. So, the reality is
that the strongest argument for veganism is
the exact opposite of this fallacy (that because
you can't be perfect, because you can't do
everything, you can't do anything). You can
do something, you can do this. This is a positive
change you can make now, and in a sense you
don't have to sacrifice anything to do it.
You don't have to sacrifice your humanitarian
interest in the Syrian Civil War, if that's
what turns your crank, and you don't have
to sacrifice your humantiarian interest in
Laos or Cambodia, or [any of the] crazy stuff
I cared about for so long. You can do it all.
And if you're wondering, by the way, this
scarf is not a Palestinian scarf, and it's
not a middle-eastern scarf at all. This is
a traditional, Cambodian scarf called a krama.
This is what we wore in Cambodia. And, um,
you wore a red one, back in the old days of
the civil war, to show that you were pro-Communist,
and you wore a blue one to show that you were
anti-Communist. So the whole time that I was
in Cambodia, I would wear Cambodian scarves,
and I would make it a point to make sure that
my color showed that I was on the side of
"democracy and human rights", whatever that
means.